Results
Identification of Conserved Putative CREs in Mosquitoes. A separate study produced the set of orthologous genes found between any 2 of the 3 mosquito species, An. gambiae, Ae. Aegypti, and Cx. quinquefasciatus, analyzed here (http://www.vectorbase.org/Other/ComparativeAnalyses). We focused on unique orthologous genes between pairs of species (one-to-one orthologues) because selective pressures and drift may result in changes in the sequences of control DNA in paralogous genes (19–21). Gene pairs whose predicted assembly and primary structure were ambiguous or uninformative were removed from this dataset, resulting in 21,537 available combinations (see Fig. 1). Of these, 18,873 (87.6%) were present in all 3 mosquito species.
MDOS analyses identified a total of 1,001 motifs (391 7-mers, 432 8-mers, and 178 9-mers) between species pairs that were conserved significantly (conservation z-scores ≥3) within DNA fragments up to 2 kb in length located at the 5′-end gene boundaries defined by VectorBase [supporting information (SI) Table S1]. More conserved motifs (including reverse complement sequences) were found between Ae. aegypti and Cx. quinquefasciatus (n = 723) than between Cx. quinquefasciatus and An. gambiae (n = 454), or Ae. aegypti and An. gambiae (n = 371). In addition, comparisons between Ae. aegypti and Cx. quinquefasciatus generally produced higher conservation z-scores. These results are not surprising, given the more recent proposed phylogenetic divergence between these 2 species (22). Uninformative “N” designations at the 5′- or 3′-ends were removed in subsequent analyses and displays resulting in some motifs having lengths of 6 nucleotides.

Of the 1,001 motifs, 153 were determined to be conserved significantly (conservation z-scores ≥3) among all 3 mosquito species (Table S1). MDOS comparisons also were made between Drosophila melanogaster and each mosquito species to assess conservation of the discovered motifs in a more evolutionarily distant (≈250 Mya) and nonblood feeding Dipteran. Sixteen of the 153 motifs had conservation z-scores ≥2 among all four Dipterans, and 4 of these (CGATCG, GATCGG, YGATCG, and RCGATCR) were present with z-scores ≥3 in all mosquito-fruit fly combinations. The remaining 137 show no consistently significant conservation within 5′-end flanking regions of D. melanogaster gene orthologues and these were designated “mosquito motifs.” Twenty (14.5%) of the 137 mosquito motifs received conservation z-scores ≥3 in only 1 pairwise D. melanogaster/mosquito comparison, 6 (4.3%) received conservation z-scores ≥3 in two D. melanogaster/mosquito pairwise comparisons, and none received a conservation z-score ≥3 in all 3 D. melanogaster/mosquito comparisons. Mosquito motifs with higher conservation z-scores among mosquitoes were in general those receiving the lowest conservation z-scores in D. melanogaster/mosquito comparisons (Fig. 2). The TTTGACAG motif and variations are associated with the highest conservation z-scores in mosquitoes (Aa/Ag = 9.7, Aa/Cq = 11.4, Cq/Ag = 12.1), and have consistently negative conservation z-scores for D. melanogaster/mosquito comparisons (Dm/Aa = –2.1, Dm/Ag = –5.3, Dm/Cq = –0.4) (see Table S1).

Fig. 2.
View larger version:
In this page In a new window
Download as PowerPoint Slide
Fig. 2.
Evolutionary conservation of motifs as evaluated using MDOS within 5′ flanking regions of orthologous genes. (A) Conservation z-scores for 137 mosquito enriched motifs derived through species pair-wise comparisons of the 5′ flanking regions of one-to-one orthologous genes shared between Aedes aegypti (Aa), Anopheles gambiae (Ag), and Culex quinquefasciatus (Cq), evaluated in species pair-wise comparisons of orthologous genes of Aa, Ag, Cq and Drosophila melanogaster (Dm). (B–D) Conservation z-scores for the 177 Dmel/mosquito 8-mers derived from species pairwise comparisons of either Dm and (B) Aa, (C) Ag, or (D) Cq and evaluated in species pairwise comparisons of orthologous genes of Aa, Ag, Cq, and Dm. The dotted lines denote a conservation z-score equal to 3.

A reciprocal MDOS analysis was applied to test whether the results of the mosquito analyses were biased by the order in which they were discovered. Drosophila melanogaster and mosquito orthologous genes were screened for conserved 8-mers (Dmel-mosquito 8-mers) using the same criteria applied to the mosquito pair analyses. Despite the discovery of 177 nonredundant Dmel-mosquito 8-mers, none had a conservation z-score ≥3 in all three D. melanogaster/mosquito pairwise comparisons (see Fig. 2 B–D; Table S1). Two motifs (ATCTWAATC and CGATCKT) received conservation z-scores ≥3 in all mosquito/mosquito combinations, and were designated previously as mosquito motifs (see Table S1). One, GTGGAAKT, received a conservation z-score ≥2 in all 3 D. melanogaster/mosquito comparisons and its biological function is currently unknown.

Mosquito Motif Enrichment Within Temporally and Spatially Defined Gene Clusters. The 137 mosquito motifs were classified into 18 families (a–r) based on sequence similarity (Fig. S1 and Table S1). Although sequence-based clustering defines putative CRE families, each of the 137 mosquito motifs was tested individually in subsequent analyses for association with genes that display similar expression profiles, because different members of a motif family may act as either activators or repressors of gene expression during reproductive development in mosquitoes (23, 24).
Expression data derived from Marinotti et al. (13, 14) on 8,661 An. gambiae genes were screened and used to cluster 4,067 of these according to the time course (TC) of their mRNA abundance profiles following a blood meal (103 TC clusters) or to their exclusive or preferential accumulation in a specific tissue (9 clusters) (Table S2). A total of 624 associations comprising 122 of the 137 mosquito motifs (89%) were found within the 5′-end flanking regions of genes whose mRNA abundance varied significantly (P-value ≤0.01) in response to a blood meal (Fig. S2, Table S3). Notable examples include the association of GATA-containing motifs in the g family with genes up-regulated at 3 h after blood meal (hPBM) (Fig. 3). Motif families a, b, c, and e also showed significant association with genes whose mRNAs increased in abundance following a blood meal. Sixty-four motif-cluster associations identified 35 (26%) of the 137 mosquito motifs as enriched significantly (P-value ≤0.01) within 5′-end flanking regions of tissue-specific/enhanced gene clusters, especially in those expressed within the midgut (23) (17%) (see Fig. 3; Table S3). Of the mosquito motifs identified, 23 are enriched significantly (P-value ≤0.01) in putative regulatory regions of genes induced in the midgut of Ae. aegypti after a blood meal (12) (Fig. S3; Table S4). Nine of the 23 are shared among genes expressed in the midguts of Ae. aegypti and An. gambiae.

Fig. 3.
View larger version:
In this page In a new window
Download as PowerPoint Slide
Fig. 3.
Associations of mosquito motifs with gene expression profiles in An. gambiae. Motif enrichment within (A) 5′-end flanking regions of genes in clusters responsive to blood meal ingestion, and in (B) 5′-end flanking regions of genes in clusters enriched in selected tissues. The significance of motif enrichment is indicated by pseudocolor of -log10 (P-value) determined through hypergeometric statistics, and the median expression profile of each gene cluster is shown below each respective column. Red and green colors represent higher and lower relative mRNA accumulation, respectively. Asterisks (*) indicate a match to a previously described mosquito TFBS (Table S5). Heatmaps were created with Matrix2png (58). FB, fat body; hPBM, hours post blood meal; MG, midgut; OV, ovaries; TC, time course clusters (Table S2).

The motif/cluster associations were validated by shuffling the nucleotides within each mosquito motif to produce random permutations followed by expression-cluster enrichment analyses. Permutations that did not maintain nucleotide composition resulted in only 1 motif with associated P-value ≤0.001 (data not shown). Permutations constrained to maintain nucleotide composition resulted in few shuffled motifs enriched (P-value ≤0.001) within the 5′-end flanking regions of genes whose mRNA increased in abundance following a blood meal (11 motifs), or enriched in genes expressed in the midgut, fat body, or ovaries (2 motifs) (Fig. S4). These results support the conclusion that the previously established associations are not determined by nucleotide composition (for example, AT richness).

The sequences of 41 of the 137 conserved mosquito motifs align with transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) identified previously in 8 genes from mosquitoes using experimental approaches, such as electrophoretic mobility shift assays, DNase I footprinting, and deletion/mutational analysis (Table S5). Nine motifs (GATAAGA, GATAAGM, GATAAGR, WGATAAG, WGATAAGM, TGATAAG, WGATAAS, ATAAGATAA, and YGATAAS) align perfectly or with 1 mismatch to GATA-factor binding sites characterized for the promoter of the Ae. aegypti vitellogenin-encoding genes [VgA1, L41842; VgB, AY380797; VgC, AY373377 (25)] or the vitellogenin receptor-encoding gene [VgR, L77800 (26)]. The TGATAAG motif also is found in the putative cis-regulatory regions of vitellogenin genes of Cx. quinquefasciatus, An. gambiae, An. stephensi, and An. albimanus [CPIJ001358, AF281078, DQ442990, AY691327, respectively; present study, (27)]. GATA-binding factors are both positive and negative regulators of vitellogenesis (23, 28), and discernible mRNA accumulation patterns are associated with distinct members of the GATA-motif family. For example, GATAAGAT and WGATWAGAT are enriched in An. gambiae gene clusters whose mRNAs increase in abundance following a blood meal, and WGATAAS is associated with both increases and decreases (see Fig. 3). Three other conserved motifs (TGACCTY, TGACCTC, TGACCT) align to known mosquito TFBS of the ecdysone receptor and ultraspiracle complex (25, 29), and RTGACGTC aligns with a recognition sequence in a gene encoding vitellogenin binding protein (30). These TFBS are associated with the regulation of vitellogenesis (31), and the enrichment of the vitellogenin binding protein and ecdysone receptor and ultraspiracle TFBS within specific gene-expression clusters is consistent with this function (gene clusters induced after a blood meal and those enriched within fat body). Finally, 6 motifs (YGATCKT, TTTGACAG, TATCAGY, YTATCAGY, TWATCAGY, and TTTTATAC) aligned to putative trypsin response elements (PTRE) or coordinating elements located directly 5′ to the PTRE. The PTRE and its associated elements have been implicated in the regulation of early and late trypsin genes in response to the blood meal in anopheline mosquitoes (32).

Discussion
The role CREs play in regulating gene expression during development is well-established (33), and the development of tools for their identification is an active area of research following the publication of genome sequence and associated genome-wide expression datasets. However, the discovery in silico of CREs is challenging because typically they are short, degenerate, and contained within vast amounts of intergenic genomic DNA. Despite these limitations, various computational approaches have been developed for their discovery (34–37). Comparative genomics represents a powerful extension to CRE discovery that diminishes these effects. Functional gene regulatory elements, including CREs, are proposed to diverge at much lower rates compared to neutral sequences because of selective pressures, and therefore may stand out from surrounding neutral DNA by virtue of their greater levels of conservation among orthologous sequences. Previous work has demonstrated the utility of this concept (38–40) and comparative genomics of insects has been applied successfully to map putative CREs in the genomes of relatively closely related Drosophila species, [divergence times estimated ≤50 Mya (39)], in which orthologous intergenic sequences are aligned more easily. The work presented in the present study includes mosquito species with phylogenetic relationships spanning 20 to 200 Mya with genomic comparisons complicated by large amounts of dispersed repetitive elements (3).

The MDOS algorithm (10) was designed to mitigate these problems by not requiring alignment of orthologous sequences, and incorporating features that account for the greater probability for the co-occurrence of a motif because of shared ancestry in orthologous sequences. The application of MDOS for computational discovery of putative CREs shared among mosquitoes resulted in the identification of mosquito-specific or enriched motifs. These motifs demonstrate that MDOS can identify related DNA sequences in diverged mosquitoes and may be useful in similar scenarios in which genome sequences are being analyzed for species that have no other closely related genomes available. Furthermore, the identification in silico of GATA-factor and other TFBS that are identical to those whose function was established experimentally (25, 26, 28–30, 32, 41, 42) serves as a powerful positive control for these analyses. The 5′-end regions of immune-related genes from An. gambiae and D. melanogaster were screened for conserved motifs, and AT-rich domains were found to associate with NFκB response elements (43). These sequences were not identified in our analyses because the restrictions on the dataset we used eliminated many of the immune-related genes where one-to-one orthology may be difficult to establish. In addition, most AT-rich domains discovered in their study were ≤6 nucleotides in length, and our analysis only addressed those recovered with lengths of 7 to 9 nucleotides.

The 3 mosquito species included in this study require a blood meal for successful reproduction. Although this trait is not unique to this group of arthropods, acquiring the necessary nutrients for egg development from ingested blood is a specialized adaptation in insects. There is debate on when and how hematophagy arose in mosquito evolution (44), but it is hypothesized that the occurrence of this trait in the larger clade is monophyletic (45, 46). Most of the discovered mosquito motifs are associated with blood meal-regulated genes. Thus, these data support a common hematophagous ancestor for all mosquitoes, and indicate that hematophagy acts as a selective force for conservation of CREs.

The functionality of some of the discovered motifs was supported further in An. gambiae and Ae. aegypti by their association with genes displaying enriched transcription product accumulation within tissues responsible for blood meal digestion and reproduction. These findings bolster the conclusion that these mosquitoes share a regulatory code controlling expression levels for some genes regulated after hematophagy. The availability of additional genome-wide studies of gene expression for all 3 mosquito species will facilitate discovery of other associations of the motifs with specific gene-regulation patterns.

The present study and similar genome-wide approaches to identify putative CRE in mosquitoes (43) are furthering our understanding of the mechanisms involved in gene regulation in this group of vector insects. An expanded set of putative mosquito CREs will allow the definition of genome-wide motif-association maps and the identification of cis-regulatory modules comprising multiple, linked CREs that convey specific patterns of gene expression. Experimental validation of the functionality of each discovered motif and regulatory module is necessary and will provide support for the development of mosquito synthetic promoters that deliver desired and predetermined expression patterns in transgenic mosquitoes. Promoters that direct expression of transgenes specifically to the germ cells would be useful for the development of gene-drive mechanisms for spreading a desired (pathogen-resistance) trait in a mosquito population (47). Gene-specific knockdown or robust expression of exogenous odorant receptors or odorant binding proteins in the antenna of anthropophilic mosquitoes could redirect their preferences toward other animals (48). Targeted expression of antipathogen effector genes in the midguts, salivary glands, and hemolymph (via fat body-specific control DNA), 3 sites of interaction of most pathogens with their insect vectors, could reduce mean intensities of infection to zero, preventing pathogen transmission and disease (49). The availability of defined synthetic mosquito promoters that direct controlled, local gene expression in response to pathogens also would be a major advance. These promoters will allow engineering of mosquitoes with increased parasite or virus resistance. These and similar envisioned applications for mosquito control and the control of mosquito-borne disease transmission will benefit greatly from a better understanding of gene regulation mechanisms in these insects.